>> Mathew DesLauriers: So what I'm gonna
do is I'm gonna go back to my terminal,
and I'm going to hit Ctrl+C
to stop that process.
And I'm gonna create a new sketch.
So this one I'm gonna call shader.js.
Again, I'm gonna do --new
to create a new file, and
then I'm gonna do --template=shader.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And now what should
happen is if we reload our page and
just see 9966,
>> Mathew DesLauriers: We
should have this sort of
gradient-looking thing.
And I'm gonna just open up our
code that we just created, so
it should be in the same folder
as the rest of your stuff.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So
there is a few new things here,
one thing you'll notice is
that there is no three.js.
And you can us three.js to create shaders,
and to create these kind of images.
But what I wanted to do is just focus
this example on just purely the code that
makes up the shader, the GLSL code, and
try and create images just using shaders.
Because actually there's such a sort
of big, complex world to shaders.
You can use them on meshes, and you can
create really interesting patterns and
surfaces.
You can also use shaders to manipulate
the way a mesh actually looks.
Instead of making it a sphere,
you can make it a really bumpy sphere,
you can make it a really sort
of parametric-looking thing.
And so it's really, really powerful, but
it's such a big topic that it would take
at least a couple days to
start to cover it all.
And so what I wanted to do was just focus
purely on the shader code, just get us
a bit familiar with the syntax,
because it's a bit of a different syntax.
And so at the very top of our
program we have CANVAS-sketch, and
then we have a util/shader.
And this is a utility that I
like to use to just get really
quickly started with a full screen shader,
just like this.
And then we have this
thing called glslify.
And we're gonna get into this in a second,
but
this is basically a module and
a tool that we use to write shaders,
just like we're writing
the rest of our program.
Cuz you'll notice, so far during
the day we've been requiring modules,
we've been getting utilities from NPM and
stuff like that.
Well, we wanna be able to do
the same thing with our shader code.
But you'll notice it's not JavaScript,
so we can't just require or
import something,
just like we are with everything else.
So we actually have to use
this tool called glslify,
and that's going to allow us
to import some utilities.
So just like we're importing other
utilities, whether it's color palette or
something like that.
Because of this, we're gonna end
up being able to import utilities.
You don't really need to use this yet.
You could just go without using it for
the first exercise.
But we will probably be using it a bit
later, so I'll just keep it here for now.
And then we have our settings,
they're pretty familiar.
You just need to make sure you
specify webgl instead of using 2D,
cuz we're now using WebGL canvas,
and you make sure it's animated.
Then here we have our actual shader code.
And so two things you'll notice.
One is that it's a template string,
just es6,
this allows us to do multi-line strings.
And then the other thing is we're
wrapping it inside of this GLSL.
And if I was to delete that,
it's still gonna work fine.
And so really GLSL, this utility glslify,
it's really just gonna be useful
when we start to bring in modules and
put them inside of our shader code.
But we're not doing that yet, so
whether or not you have this function,
it's not gonna make a difference,
it will just be handy later on.
And then, if we just skip this string for
now and we just come back to it,
and then we have a sketch function.
This is our artwork,
we're just sort of using this utility.
Remember this is the utility
that I brought in, createShader.
And you pass in the WebGL context,
which comes from CANVAS-sketch,
you pass along your string,
your fragment shader string.
Basically, the way that you specify
this language is with strings in
JavaScript with WebGL, and
then you specify any uniforms.
And remember how we're saying uniform is
something that is a value from JavaScript,
and it's basically like
imagine a variable,
except it's a variable inside of our
shader, and we'll get into that as well.
So going back to the shader stuff here,
what I'm gonna do, and it might not
work in your editor, but you can actually
set it up if you want in your time or
later, is to use GLSL syntax
highlighting for this template string.
And this is from an extension, there's a
couple extensions that I have in VS Code.
One of them is called Shader languages
support and the other one is called,
what is it, Tagged template strings, or
something like that, in your Comment
tagged template strings in VS Code.
Sublime Text probably has
some similar stuff, but
it's really handy when
you're working with shaders.
You just put a comment saying glsl, and
then any string after it is
gonna get syntax highlighters.
And I'm just doing that mainly for
you guys to see and
understand this a bit better as we code.
So if we try and dissect this,
we have some variables here.
One of them is coming from JavaScript,
time, this is the current time in seconds.
It's a float,
which means it's a decimal value.
And then we have this other variable,
which is a varying called vUv.
And we can't really control this one,
it just comes from the WebGl, and
you can just imagine it as coming
from this black box for now.
And it gives us the UV coordinates of
the surface that we're drawing into.
And then here we have
a big bunch of stuff, and
I'm just gonna replace
this with nothing for now.
We're gonna start again, just so
that we don't have to dissect
whatever that code was.
So if you don't have anything
in your main function,
main function is where all the sort
of pixel manipulation comes from, and
every shader has to have a main function.
And remember, the point of the shader
is to define what is the pixel color.
So let's start by just
making everything white.
And it looks like this.
We have FragColor,
which is a very special built-in reserve
word in shader languages, or
at least in this shader language.
And we assign that to vec4[1.0].
Something that's really important, that's
really annoying and really important.
If I was to open my console and then I was
just to put in, maybe it will work here.
But in some cases, and
we'll probably get into this later,
but in some cases you're gonna get
an error where if you just put a number
without a decimal point,
it might error out.
And that's just something
to be really mindful of.
So if you have an error in your code,
just check to make sure your numbers,
they have to have a decimal point
if they're a floating point number.
Cuz if you don't have a decimal point,
sometimes
the language will interpret that as
an integer and that will create an error.
So just, that's one thing to keep in mind.
Okay, so if you got this far
you'll have a white background.
And we're just gonna try and decipher
this sort of data structure and create
something that's red by using instead
of a single value in the constructors.
Cuz remember, when you use a single value,
it sets that same value for
all the different components.
And if we set it to 1.0, 0.1, we should
end up with a pure red background.
And what's happening is that we're
using a four component vector,
where it's red, green, blue, and
then alpha, the opacity of the canvas.
We can set that to a different value, and
we're gonna end up with a darker canvas.
So usually, we wanna use alpha of 1,
just means full transparency, and
we're using vec4 because
FragColor is a RGBA value.
Just like in CSS, we have RGBA, and
then you can specify different values
you might be familiar with,
I'll just write here.
You might be familiar with this
syntax in CSS or in, sometimes,
the JavaScript as well.
And this syntax is where it's
the red color, the green color,
the blue color, and
those values are between 0 and 255, and
then you have the alpha between 0 and 1.
Well, this is pretty similar,
except all of our values and
shaders are generally
gonna be between 0 and 1.
So it's red of 1, it's basically
just like saying red of 255.
Makes sense?
Okay, so the first thing to try and do
here is to, say, I wanna make a gradient.
So instead of using
these three components,
which is red, by doing r 1, g 0, b 0,
we're gonna replace this with a vec3, and
inside of that vec3 we're
going to set the UVcoord.x.
So just remember that vUv
is pointing to a vec2.
And when you have a vec2 or
a vec3, vec2 means it has an x and
y coordinate,
vec3 means it has an x and y and
z coordinate, and
vec4 means it has x, y, z and w.
And so because this is a vec2 we can do .x
or .y, we end up with that gradient image.